Custom plugin documentation (#1222)
Redocly/redocly-cli: docs/custom-plugins/visitor.md

# Visitor pattern

_Visitor_ is a design pattern that allows operations to be performed on individual elements in a more complex structure. Redocly uses it as the basis for custom plugins where every node in a document must be evaluated, for example when applying rules or decorators.

To understand how this applies to your API description, think of the document as a tree structure. The top level elements are entries like `info` and `components`. To examine the `description` field in the `info` section, the visitor goes to the `info` node first, then on to the `description` node. This pattern is repeated all over the document as the visitor pattern works its way around the document tree.

> <a id="visitor-object"></a><a id="format-of-visitor-object"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Suggestion: Remove -- I didn't find any anchor links to either of these anchors.

## Structure of the visitor object

In your plugin, create a JavaScript visitor object, and describe the functionality required for each type of node.

> Redocly CLI calls `enter()` while going down the tree and `leave()` going up the tree after processing the node and its children.

Reviewer: idea: I'm usually not for diagrams or illustrations, because they can be hard to maintain. I could see a diagram adding some value here though. 

```
Root enter() --> Info enter() --> License enter() --> ... (turn around) ...  ↓
    --> License leave() --> Info leave() --> Root leave()
```

I don't think this is required to do (I mean to leave it as an idea for the future if we find people need more help with the concept).

> `skip()` predicate is called and if it returns `true` the node is ignored for this visitor.

Reviewer 2: This statement is confusing to me. When is the skip predicate called?

Author: Let me have another go. We visit each node in turn and call whichever of these methods is defined.

> If the `skip()` predicate is defined and returns `true` the node is ignored for this visitor.

Reviewer: question: Does this result in all children nodes being ignored too? I'm trying to understand the reason to skip something versus omitting it from the plugin.

```js
function ExampleRule() {
  const seen = {};
  return {
    Root: {
      leave() {
        // check something and report
      }
    }
    Operation: {
      enter(operation, ctx) {
        seen[operation.operationId] = true;
      },
    }
  };
}
```

Keys of the object are one of the following:

- document-specific node types, such as the [OpenAPI node types](../../openapi-visual-reference/openapi-node-types.md).
- `any` - visitor is called on every node.
- `ref` - visitor is called on $ref nodes.

## Visitors execution and $ref

Top level **visitor functions** run only once for each node.
If the same node is referenced by the $ref multiple times,
top-level **visitor functions** are executed only once for this node.

> This works fine for most context-free rules which check basic things. If you need contextual info you should use [nested visitors](#nested-visitors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works fine for most context-free rules. If you need contextual info you should use [nested visitors](#nested-visitors).
```
suggestion: Not sure what is the line between basic and not basic? It seems like contextual info is the line, so maybe it is more clear with that removed because the next sentence addresses the context.

## Nested visitors

> Visitor object (if it is not `any` or `ref`) can define [nested visitors](#nested-visitors).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The visitor object (if it is not `any` or `ref`) can define [nested visitors](#nested-visitors).
```

Here is a basic example of a nested visitor:

```js
function ExampleRule() {
  return {
    Operation: {
      Schema: {
        enter(schema, ctx, parents) {
          console.log(`type ${schema.type} from ${parents.Operation.operationId}`)
        }
      }
    }
  };
}
```

The `Schema` **visitor function** is called by Redocly CLI only if the Schema Object is encountered while traversing a tree while the Operation Object is **entered**.

As the third argument, `enter()` in a **nested visitor object** accepts the `parents` object with corresponding parent nodes as defined in the **visitor object**.

> <div class="attention"> It will be executed only for the first level of Schema Object.</div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="attention"> It will be executed only for the first level of the Schema Object.</div>
```

> <div class="attention"> It will be executed only for the first level of the Schema Object.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::attention
It is executed only for the first level of the Schema Object.
:::
```

  const seen = {};
  return {
    Root: {
      leave() {
        // check something and report
      }
    }
    Operation: {
      enter(operation, ctx) {
        seen[operation.operationId] = true;
      },
    }
  };
}
```

Keys of the object are one of the following:

- document-specific node types, such as the [OpenAPI node types](../../openapi-visual-reference/openapi-node-types.md).
- `any` - visitor is called on every node.
- `ref` - visitor is called on $ref nodes.

## Visitors execution and $ref

Top level **visitor functions** run only once for each node.
If the same node is referenced by the $ref multiple times,
top-level **visitor functions** are executed only once for this node.

This works fine for most context-free rules which check basic things. If you need contextual info you should use [nested visitors](#nested-visitors).

## Nested visitors

Visitor object (if it is not `any` or `ref`) can define [nested visitors](#nested-visitors).

Here is a basic example of a nested visitor:

```js
function ExampleRule() {
  const seen = {};
  return {
    Operation: {
      // skip: (value, key) => ... // if needed
      // enter(operation) {} // if needed

>       Schema(schema, ctx, parents) {

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't it be better to always explicitly use the `enter` visitor in our documentation? I remember, named visitor functions confused me when I saw them first time. It still looks strange to me that the same thing could be an object or a function  😅

Author: Ah, good spot. I didn't update this bit (just moved it to a new file) but I agree an object would be clearer. I'll switch the example.

Author: @tatomyr can you take another look? I tried to replace this existing example with an equivalent. It seems to work the same but would be good to get your eyes on it too
